---
metaTitle: "Oracle Database - Sequences"
description: "Creating a Sequence: Example"
---

# Sequences



## Creating a Sequence: Example


Purpose

Use the CREATE SEQUENCE statement to create a sequence, which is a database object from which multiple users may generate unique integers. You can use sequences to automatically generate primary key values.

When a sequence number is generated, the sequence is incremented, independent of the transaction committing or rolling back. If two users concurrently increment the same sequence, then the sequence numbers each user acquires may have gaps, because sequence numbers are being generated by the other user. One user can never acquire the sequence number generated by another user. After a sequence value is generated by one user, that user can continue to access that value regardless of whether the sequence is incremented by another user.

Sequence numbers are generated independently of tables, so the same sequence can be used for one or for multiple tables. It is possible that individual sequence numbers will appear to be skipped, because they were generated and used in a transaction that ultimately rolled back. Additionally, a single user may not realize that other users are drawing from the same sequence.

After a sequence is created, you can access its values in SQL statements with the CURRVAL pseudocolumn, which returns the current value of the sequence, or the NEXTVAL pseudocolumn, which increments the sequence and returns the new value.

**Prerequisites**

To create a sequence in your own schema, you must have the CREATE SEQUENCE system privilege.

To create a sequence in another user's schema, you must have the CREATE ANY SEQUENCE system privilege.

Creating a Sequence: Example
The following statement creates the sequence customers_seq in the sample schema oe. This sequence could be used to provide customer ID numbers when rows are added to the customers table.

```sql
CREATE SEQUENCE customers_seq
START WITH     1000
INCREMENT BY   1
NOCACHE
NOCYCLE;

```

The first reference to customers_seq.nextval returns 1000. The second returns 1001. Each subsequent reference will return a value 1 greater than the previous reference.



#### Syntax


- CREATE SEQUENCE SCHEMA.SEQUENCE { INCREMENT BY INTEGER | START WITH INTEGER | MAXVALUE INTEGER | NOMAXVALUE INTEGER | MINVALUE INTEGER | NOMINVALUE INTEGER | CYCLE INTEGER | NOCYCLE INTEGER | CACHE | NOCACHE | ORDER | NOODER }



#### Parameters


|Parameter|Details
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---
|schema|schema name
|increment by|interval between the numbers
|start with|first number needed
|maxvalue|Maximum value for the sequence
|nomaxvalue|Maximum value is defaulted
|minvalue|minimum value for the sequence
|nominvalue|minimum value is defaulted
|cycle|Reset to the start after reaching this value
|nocycle|Default
|cache|Preallocation limit
|nocache|Default
|order|Guarantee the order of numbers
|noorder|default

